Let's now take a deeper
dive into the structure
and functionality of these
single-stage completion
methods.
These are the
methods that complete
after a single previous
stage completes.
We'll start with one
of the simplest ones--
the method called thenApply.
You can see its
signature up here.
thenApply will apply
a function action
to the results of
the previous stage.
So when the completable
future of the previous stage
is completed and triggers, that
causes the thenApply method
to be called.
The thenApply future
framework calls it back.
And that will then go ahead
and apply the function
to the values of
the previous stage.
thenApply itself
returns a future
that will contain the
results of the action.
That really is a proxy to
the result of the action.
So after that future completes,
after this computation
completes, then that
future will be triggered,
and we'll get the
results of this action.
You typically want
to use thenApply
for quick, asynchronous
actions that return a value,
rather than return a
completable future.
You'll notice I use
the word future here
as kind of a shorthand.
I almost always mean
completable future.
Just got tedious to
write completable future
all over the place.
But when we talk
about futures now,
we're talking about completable
futures, not Java futures.
So in this particular
case, after we
finished reducing
the big fraction,
then we're going to go ahead and
convert it to a mixed string.
So thenApply is called, and
reducing a reduced fraction
to a mixed string is a very
quick, synchronous action.
Doesn't need to run in its
own thread, for example.
Let's now talk about another
method that looks superficially
similar to thenApply,
but actually
has a very important
distinction.
This is called the
thenCompose method.
And thenCompose also
applies a function action
to the results of the previous
stage when it completes.
And what it does is it
returns a future that
contains a result of the action
directly, not a nested future.
And that's the main
difference between thenCompose
and thenApply.
thenCompose can end up
with nesting of futures--
completable futures--
whereas thenApply
can end up with nested futures,
whereas thenCompose will not.
So it's often very useful
to flatten the results.
So you could think
of thenCompose
as being a bit similar to the
concept of flatMap on a stream
or on an optional, where it
flattens things out and doesn't
allow nesting to continue.
So in this simple example,
if you use thenCompose
with completable
futures, you'll end up
with a single
completable future.
Whereas if you
use thenApply, you
can end up with nested
completable futures.
Let's give an example to make
this a little bit more clear.
So it's best to use thenCompose
for longer-running asynchronous
actions that return a future.
Well, let's take a
look at an example.
So here we've got a function
that will reduce and multiply
big fractions.
So this is called
reduceAndMultiplyFractions.
That's the name of the variable.
And you can see
that what it does
is it uses the CompletableFuture
supplyAsync method to go
ahead and reduce some
unproduced big fraction.
And again, just
for brevity's sake,
I used BF instead
of Big Fraction,
because it was getting too
long to fit on the slide.
What we do now is
after we've started
to do that reduction--
remember, the
reduce operation will
return a big fraction.
supplyAsync will wrap that
up in a completable future.
And after that reduce is
done, the thenCompose method
will be called.
And what thenCompose does is it
takes the reduced big fraction,
and it goes ahead
and it asynchronously
multiplies that reduced
big fraction by something
else-- some other
fraction, let's say.
Well, a supplyAsync returns
a completable future,
and thenCompose also returns
a completable future.
So you might think,
won't we end up with
a [? CompletableFuture ?] to
a [? CompletableFuture? ?] And
the answer is no, because
thenCompose flattens
the nesting so there's only a
single completable future that
comes back, which is what
you can see up at the top
as the return type for
this particular result.
Were we to use thenApply
instead of thenCompose,
we would end up with
nested completable futures,
because the action for
thenApply would return
a completable future,
and thenApply would then
wrap a completable
future around that,
so it would return a completable
future to a completable future.
Now, that will work,
but my goodness it
gets ugly very quickly.
So thenCompose doesn't
have that problem.
There's another way
to do this, however,
that uses a different
variant of thenApply.
There's also a
variant of thenApply
called thenApplyAsync.
And thenApplyAsync will go
ahead and take its action
and arrange to run
it in another thread
in the common ForkJoinPool.
So that will end up not creating
another completable future
nesting, but will have
the side effect of running
the action in the ForkJoinPool.
So it's often the case that you
can use thenApplyAsync in lieu
of thenCompose and supplyAsync.
And I actually like that
supplyAsync quite a bit,
although there's some situations
where you're better off using
supplyAysnc and thenCompose.
supplyAsync will return
a completable future
to a completable future here.
And you can use
this little idiom
in order to be able to
remove the nesting by using
thenCompose.
So here's an example where
we have a lambda expression
that we pass to supplyAsync, and
we call this longRunnerReturns
Completable Future, or CF.
So that will actually end up
creating a completable future
to a completable future to
come back from supplyAsync.
If we then go ahead and
connect it with thenCompose
and use the
Function.identity call,
we can flatten it so
there's just one level
of completable future here.
So we can avoid having to
call join when flattening
nested completable futures.
And avoiding calling join
is a really good thing
to remember to try to do that.
You could also use
thenComposeAsync.
So what you can
do then-- and you
could go ahead and
say thenComposeAsync,
and you could do
some other operation
that blocks and returns
a completable future.
So thenComposeAsync
can be used to avoid
having to call supplyAsync
again in a chain.
So these are all just
different variants of things,
different variants
of thenCompose,
different variants of thenApply.
And they have different side
effects that are pretty cool.
Let's now turn our attention
to yet another completion
stage method that's
triggered by the completion
of a single previous stage, and
that's the thenAccept method.
thenAccept takes an
action that's a consumer--
and that will be applied to the
result of the previous stage
when it completes.
And if you recall, a
consumer-- it takes in a value,
but doesn't return anything.
And so as you can see
here, it essentially
acts as a callback that needs
to have some kind of side effect
to do most anything useful.
It returns a future
to Void, which
means there is no return value.
We typically use thenAccept
only at the tailend
of a chain of completion stages.
So going back to our
example that we've
been using throughout
the lessons
to showcase this concept of
chaining that you can find
in my ex8 folder in
the GitHub repository,
this example asynchronously
reduces a big fraction.
When that finishes, it
converts the big fraction
to a mixed string.
And then thenAccept
method is called,
and that will have the side
effect to take that string
and print it out.
So the println method
reference that's passed in here
has a side effect of
printing the mixed string.
The downside of using
thenAccept anywhere
except the very, very end of
a chain of completion stage
methods is your lead to the
dreaded callback hell that's
so prominent if you program
with things like JavaScript,
where it's quite a pain to
deal with these nestings.
So I encourage you
to avoid using that
except at the end of these
long chains of completion stage
methods.